<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XVI MINERVA'S PICTURE</h2>
<p>Quite before the door was opened to my ring, I knew that something
serious had happened inside: I could hear the voices of Papiano and
Paleari away out in the street.</p>
<p>It was the Caporale woman who finally came, pale and in great
agitation, to let me in:</p>
<p>"So it's true, is it?" she cried. "Twelve thousand?" I stopped in my
tracks, breathless, dismayed. Scipione Papiano, the half-wit, crossed
the entry at just that moment, barefooted, his shoes in his hand, and
his coat off.  He too was pale and frightened.</p>
<p>I could hear his brother Terenzio vociferating violently:</p>
<p>"Well, call the police, call them, and be damned!" A flash of bitter
anger at Adriana ran through me.  In spite of my prohibition, in spite
of her promise, she had spoken!</p>
<p>"Who told you that?" I almost shouted at Miss Caporale. "Nothing of
the kind! I have found it again!"</p>
<p>The piano teacher looked at me in amazement:</p>
<p>"The money? Found again? Really? Oh, thank God! Thank God!" she
exclaimed, raising her arms devoutly; then she ran on ahead of me into
the dining room where Papiano and old Anselmo were screaming at each
other at the tops of their voices, while Adriana was weeping and
sobbing.</p>
<p>"He's found it! He's found it again!" Silvia called exultantly. "Here
is Mr. Meis now! He's gotten his money back!"</p>
<p>"What's that?"</p>
<p>"Back?"</p>
<p>"Really?"</p>
<p>The three of them stood there in utter astonishment.  Adriana and her
father with flushed faces, however; while Papiano wild-eyed,
ashen-pale, seemed staggered at the news.</p>
<p>I eyed him fixedly for a second. I must have been paler than he, and I
was quivering from head to toe.  He could not meet my gaze. His body
seemed to sag at the knees. His brother's coat fell from his grasp. I
went close up to him and held out my hand:</p>
<p>"I'm so sorry: excuse me, please--and all the rest of you..."</p>
<p>"No!" cried Adriana indignantly; but she pressed her handkerchief to
her mouth.</p>
<p>Papiano looked at her and dared not offer me his hand.  Again I said:</p>
<p>"I beg your pardon!" And I forced my clasp upon him, for the
satisfaction of sensing the tremor that was vibrating through his
whole body. His hand was as limp as a rag. He had the look of a
corpse, especially about his deadened glassy eyes.</p>
<p>"I'm extremely sorry," I added, "for all the trouble, for the very
serious trouble I have caused you--unintentionally, you may be
sure..."</p>
<p>"Not at all," Paleari stammered. "Not at all...  or rather... yes...
if I may... you see... it was something that really... yes... it
couldn't be so... there! Delighted, Mr. Meis, my congratulations ...
so glad you got it back... your money... because ..."</p>
<p>Papiano passed his two hands over his perspiring brow, ran his fingers
through his hair, took a deep breath and then, turning his back to us,
stood looking through the French doors out upon the balcony.</p>
<p>"I am like the man in the story," I began again, smiling.  "I was
looking for the donkey and I was on its back all the time: I had the
twelve thousand lire in my pocket book! The joke is on me!"</p>
<p>Adriana could not stand this:</p>
<p>"But you looked in your pocket book, and everywhere else, in my
presence; why, there, in the cabinet..."</p>
<p>"Yes, signorina," I interrupted, severely and firmly; "but I couldn't
have looked carefully enough, since, now, as you see, I have found the
money... I ask your pardon particularly, signorina; for this oversight
on my part must have cost you more suffering than any of the others. I
hope however that now..."</p>
<p>"No! No! No!" cried Adriana, breaking into sobs and dashing out of the
room with Silvia Caporale pursuing her.</p>
<p>"I don't understand!" exclaimed Paleari in amazement.</p>
<p>Papiano turned angrily toward us:</p>
<p>"Well, anyhow, I'm going to clear out--today....  It would seem that
now there is no further need of...  of..."</p>
<p>He gagged, as if his breath were giving out. Finally he decided to
address me, though he did not have the effrontery to look me in the
eye:</p>
<p>"I... I couldn't... believe me... I couldn't even say no... when
they... right here.... Why, I went right after my brother who...
irresponsible ... sick as he is... who could be sure?... He might
have... I dragged him in here by the collar.  ... A terrible scene...
I made him take off all his clothes... to search him... even under his
shirt ... and in his shoes and stockings.... And he...  oh!"</p>
<p>At this point his voice choked again and his eyes filled with tears.
Then he added in a broken, husky tone:</p>
<p>"Well, they were able to see... but, of course....  since you.... But
after what has taken place, I am going away...!"</p>
<p>"No, you're not!" I said. "By no means! On my account? No, you must
stay here! I'm the one who's going to move, if anybody is!"</p>
<p>"Why, the idea, Mr. Meis!" said old Anselmo in sincere protest.</p>
<p>Even Papiano, struggling with the tears he was trying to suppress,
made a negative gesture. At last he was able to explain:</p>
<p>"I was... I was going away anyhow! In fact, all this happened because
I... without meaning anything in the world... announced that I was
intending to leave, on account of my brother, who, really, should not
be kept at home any longer... Fact is... the Marquis gave me... see
for yourself--I have it here--a letter for the director of a
sanatorium in Naples.... I have to go to Naples anyway, for some more
documents the Marquis wants.... And my sister-in-law, who holds you...
quite properly... in high, in the very highest, esteem... jumps up and
says no one is to leave the house... that every one of us should
remain indoors ... because you... well... because you had
discovered.... That to me! Her own brother, you might say!... Yes sir,
she said it to me.... I suppose because I... poor, I grant you, but
honest after all... I am under obligations to pay to my father-in-law,
Mr. Paleari here...."</p>
<p>"What in the world are you dreaming of now?" exclaimed Paleari,
interrupting.</p>
<p>"No," said Papiano, drawing up haughtily. "It's on iny mind! I'm
bearing it in mind, don't you worry!  'And if I go away.... Poor, poor
Scipione!"</p>
<p>Papiano seemed unable to control his feelings any longer, and burst
into tears outright.</p>
<p>Paleari, deeply moved and very much perplexed, did not know what to
make of it all:</p>
<p>"Well, what's Scipione got to do with that?"</p>
<p>"My poor little brother!" Papiano continued, with such a ring of
sincerity in his voice that even I felt a choke gathering in my
throat. I concluded that his emotion was due to an access of remorse
on account of his brother, whom he had used in the venture, whom, if I
reported the matter to the police, he would have blamed for the theft,
and whom he had actually humiliated by the insulting search.</p>
<p>No one understood better than Papiano that I had not recovered the
stolen money. My unexpected declaration, coming to save him just when
he was thinking himself lost and was about to accuse Scipione (or,
according to his premeditated plan, to suggest that the half-wit alone
could be responsible for such a thing), had thrown him completely off
his pins. He was weeping now, either from an uncontrollable necessity
for giving some vent to his inner strain, or because he felt that he
could not face me except in tears. These tears, clearly enough, were
an overture of peace to me. He was kneeling in.  humble surrender at
my feet; but on one condition: that I stick to what I had said about
finding the money again; for if, profiting by his present abasement, I
were to return to my charge, he would rise against me in a fury. Put
it this way: he did not know, he was never to know, anything at all
about the theft. My generous falsehood was saving only his brother,
who, as I should understand, could not be punished anyhow, in view of
the boy's mental infirmity. On his side, I should observe, he was
pledging himself indirectly but clearly, to repay the Paleari dowry.</p>
<p>All this I read in his tears. But at last, Anselmo's exhortations and
my own prevailed upon him to master his agitation. He said he would go
to Naples but return the moment he had found a good hospital for his
brother, _cashed certain interests he owned in a business he had
recently started with a friend_, and copied the papers the Marquis
needed.</p>
<p>"By the way," he concluded, turning now to me; "it had quite gone out
of my mind. The Marquis requested me to invite you for today, if you
are free... along with my father-in-law and Adriana..."</p>
<p>"Oh, that's a good idea," exclaimed Anselmo, without letting him
finish: "Yes, we'll all go! Splendid! We have good excuse for a bit of
diversion now. What do you say, Mr. Meis? Shall we go?"</p>
<p>"So far as I am concerned..." I said, with a gesture of compliance.</p>
<p>"Well, shall we make it four o'clock then?" Papiano proposed, wiping
his eyes for good this time.</p>
<p>I went to my room, my thoughts all on Adriana, who had answered my
story about the money by running away from us in tears. Supposing she
should come now and demand an explanation? Certainly she could not
have believed what I said. What then, could she be thinking? That, in
denying the theft, I had intended to punish her for breaking her
promise? Why had I done so,--come to think of it? Of course--because
the lawyer whom I had gone out to consult before bringing criminal
charges, had assured me that she, and everybody else in the house,
would be brought under suspicion.  She, to be sure, had announced her
willingness to face the scandal; but I, obviously, could not allow
that--just for the sake of twelve thousand lire! She, accordingly,
could interpret such generosity on my part as a sacrifice made out of
love for her!</p>
<p>Another humiliating lie forced upon me by my circumstances--a
loathsome lie which credited me with an exquisite and delicate act of
unselfishness all the finer because in no sense had she requested or
desired it!  Was this the way I should reason?</p>
<p>Why no! Not at all, not at all! Was I crazy?</p>
<p>Following the logic of my necessary and inevitable falsehood, I could
reach quite different conclusions. Bosh, this notion of generosity, of
sacrifice, of affection!  Could I engage the poor child's emotions any
further?  No, I must suppress, I must strangle my own passion, and
neither speak to Adriana again, nor look at her again in any intimate
way. Well, in that case, how could she reconcile my apparent
generosity with the demeanor I should henceforth maintain toward her?
Along this line I would be forced to use her revelation of the
theft--a revelation which I repudiated at the first opportunity--as a
pretext for breaking off relations with her! But was there any sense
to that? No, there were but two possibilities: either I had lost the
money--in which case, why was it I did not have the thief arrested,
but, instead, withdrew my affection from her as though she were the
guilty one? Or else, I had really gotten my money back--in which case,
why should I cease loving her?</p>
<p>A sense of nausea, disgust, loathing for myself seized upon me. At
least I should be able to explain to her that there was no whit of
kindness involved in the matter, that I took no legal steps, because I
couldn't, because I couldn't!... Well, I would have to give some
reason.... I couldn't let it drop like that!... Perhaps I had stolen
the money myself in the first place!  Yes, she might easily draw that
conclusion! I could let her think so!...</p>
<p>Or I could explain that I was a fugitive from persecution, a man in
trouble, compelled to drop out of sight and so unable to share his lot
with a wife!</p>
<p>Lies, lies, nothing but lies for that poor innocent creature!</p>
<p>Well, the truth, perhaps? A truth so improbable that even I who had
lived it could hardly believe it so! Could I tell her such an absurd
tale, such a disordered fancy?  And in that case, to avoid one more
lie, I should have to confess that I had told nothing but lies
hitherto!  That would be all a truthful explanation could possibly
amount to! And it would neither make me less of a scoundrel nor ease
her suffering!</p>
<p>I do believe that in the state of exasperation and disgust in which I
then found myself, I would have made a clean breast of everything to
Adriana, if, instead of sending Silvia Caporale, she had come to my
room herself to tell me why she had gone back on her promise not to
talk.</p>
<p>For that matter, I knew already from what Papiano had said. Miss
Caporale added that Adriana was inconsolable.</p>
<p>"Why should she be?" I asked with forced indifference.</p>
<p>"Because," the piano teacher answered, "she does not believe you have
found the money!"</p>
<p>It occurred to me just then--an impulse quite in harmony, moreover,
with my mood at the time--that one way out of it would be to make
Adriana lose all respect for me, let her think me a hard, selfish,
treacherous trifler whom she could not love. That would serve me right
for the harm I had done her! She would be terribly hurt for a while to
be sure, but in the end she would be the gainer.</p>
<p>"She doesn't believe it? How is that?" And I smiled shrewdly at the
Caporale woman. "Twelve thousand lire, signorina! That much money
doesn't grow on every bush! Do you think I would be as cheerful as I
am, if I had really lost it?"</p>
<p>"But Adriana said..." she tried to add.</p>
<p>"Nonsense! Plain nonsense!" I continued, interrupting.  "It's true
that... look... I did suspect for a moment; but I also told Miss
Paleari that I could not believe such a thing possible.... And, in
fact...  well, you say it for me... what reason could I have for
claiming I had recovered the money if I hadn't?"</p>
<p>Miss Caporale shrugged her shoulders:</p>
<p>"Perhaps Adriana thinks you may have some reason..."</p>
<p>"But I told you no! And no it is!" I hurriedly interjected.  "Remember
it was a matter of twelve thousand lire.... Now a lire or two would
not have made much difference.... But twelve thousand!... My
generosity is not so great as all that.... She must be thinking I'm a
hero!..."</p>
<p>When Silvia Caporale went away to report to Adriana, I wrung my hands,
and dug my teeth into my knuckles! Was that the way to go about it--as
it were, trying to pay her for her crushed illusions in my regard with
the money they had stolen from me? Could any thing be meaner, cheaper,
more cowardly? I thought of her in the next room there, raging at me
probably, despising me, not being in a position to understand that her
grief was my grief too. Yet, that was the way it had to be! She had to
hate me, despise me, as I hated and despised myself. What was more, to
increase that hatred and contempt, I would now be very courteous
toward Papiano--her enemy--as though to compensate him in her eyes for
the suspicions I and she had had of him. And my thief himself would be
disconcerted, confounded, even to the point of thinking me perhaps a
lunatic....</p>
<p>What was left? Could I do anything worse? Yes ... one thing! We were
going to the Giglios'. That very day I would begin paying open court
to Pepita Pantogada!</p>
<p>"That will make you scorn me more than ever, Adriana," I groaned,
writhing on my bed. "What else, what else, can I do for you?"</p>
<p>Shortly after four o'clock old Anselmo, in formal dress, came and
knocked on my door.</p>
<p>"I'm all ready!" I called, rising and throwing on my coat.</p>
<p>"Are you going that way?" asked Paleari in astonishment.</p>
<p>"Why?" I asked.</p>
<p>But then I noticed that I had on a Scottish cap with a visor, that I
usually wore about the house. I put it into my pocket and reached for
my hat, while Anselmo stood chuckling and chuckling to himself....</p>
<p>"Where are you going, Mr. Paleari?" I asked, as he suddenly turned
away.</p>
<p>"Why, I'm as daft as you are," he answered, pointing to his feet. "I
was going in my slippers! Just step into the other room, Mr. Meis.
Adriana is there and..."</p>
<p>"What, is she coming too?"</p>
<p>"She didn't want to," called Paleari, moving along toward his
quarters. "But I made her change her mind!  ... She's in the
dining-room, with her things on..."</p>
<p>With what cold and severe reproachfulness Miss Caporale stared at me
as I entered the room! Caught in a hopeless passion herself, she had
been so often comforted by this simple inexperienced little child! Now
that Adriana understood what the world was like, now that Adriana had
been hurt, Silvia rushed grateful and solicitous to her rescue. What
right had I to make such a good and pretty little child unhappy? As
for herself, Silvia--neither good nor pretty--men might have some
excuse for being mean to her! But not to Adriana! Not to Adriana!</p>
<p>This she seemed to be saying with her eyes as she invited me to survey
the wreckage I had made in the life beside her. And in truth, how
pale, how bravely pale, Adriana was! Her eyes were red with weeping.</p>
<p>What an anguished effort it must have cost to get up and dress to go
out for an afternoon--with me!</p>
<p>* * *</p>
<p>Notwithstanding the state of mind in which I went on the party, the
personality and the home of the Marquis Giglio d'Auletta aroused some
curiosity in me. I knew the reason for his residence in Rome: he saw
no possible way to the restoration of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies
except through the victory of the Temporal Power: once the Pope could
recover his capital, the Kingdom of Italy might go to pieces, and in
the upset ... who could tell? The Marquis was not strong on
prophesying! One thing at a time! Attend to the job in front of you!
For the moment--war, without asking or giving quarter, and in the
Clerical camp!  And his salon, in fact, was the rallying place of the
most intransigent prelates of the Curia, and the most valorous laic
champions of the Blacks.</p>
<p>On that day, however, we found no other callers in the vast and
sumptuous drawing-room. Conspicuous, in the middle of the floor, was a
painter's easel with a canvas about half finished: it was Minerva,
Pepita's lap-dog, a black little beast, stretched out on a white sofa,
her pointed snout resting on her two front paws.</p>
<p>"By Bernaldez, the Spanish artist!" announced Papiano gravely, as
though he were making an introduction that required an unusually low
bow from the rest of us.</p>
<p>Pepita Pantogada came in, followed, shortly, by her governess, Signora
Candida.</p>
<p>On previous occasions, I had seen these two women in the semi-darkness
of my room; now, tinder a full light, Miss Pantogada seemed a
different woman, not as a whole perhaps, but in respect of her nose.
What?  Had I ever seen that nose before? I had imagined it as a small
upturned affair, impudent rather than not.  But no: it was strong,
robust, aquiline.</p>
<p>A stunning girl, all the same! Dark complexion, flashing black eyes,
coal black hair, wavy and shiny.  Thin lips, sharp, keen, sarcastic,
bright red. Painted, almost--rather than fitted--on her slender
shapely form, a dark dress with white lace-work.</p>
<p>The soft placid beauty of the blond Adriana faded under the brilliancy
of this superior glow.</p>
<p>And, bless me, at last I solved the mystery of that steeple on Signora
Candida's head. It was... it was first of all: a magnificent blondish
wig of waved hair; and pitched, if I may say so, on the wig, a sort of
tent--a broad light-blue kerchief, or mantilla, of silk, that was
drawn down and knotted coyly under her chin. A magnificent frame,
truly for such a plain, lean, angular, washed-out face, which inches
of rouge and powder and--so forth, could not improve.</p>
<p>Meantime Minerva was barking so vociferously that we were hardly able
to exchange formalities. But the poor doggie was not barking at us.
She was barking at the easel, and at the white sofa, which she
remembered as instruments of torture apparently. The protest and
lament of an incensed soul! Yelp! Get out of this room! Yelp! Get out
of this room! But the easel stood there unperturbed on its three legs;
so Minerva retreated slowly on her four, barking, showing her teeth,
returning to the charge, retreating again, in terrible commotion.</p>
<p>A fat chubby body on four over-slender legs, Minerva was not a pretty
dog. Many times grandmother, I imagine: there was no sparkle in her
eyes, and her hair had turned gray in places. On her back, just
forward of her tail, was a bare spot, resulting from the habit she had
of scratching herself furiously on the rungs of chairs, on the corners
of book-cases, on anything hard and sharp that would reach that
particular trouble.</p>
<p>This I knew already, however.</p>
<p>Finally Pepita seized Minerva by the nape of the neck and tossed her
at Signora Candida, scolding:</p>
<p>"_Cito_!" which was Pantogadese for "_zitto_"--"shut up!"</p>
<p>And Don Ignazio Giglio d'Auletta came hurrying in.  He trotted--so
round-shouldered he bent almost double--to an arm-chair he always sat
in next to a window, fell into his seat, brought his cane to rest
between his two legs, and finally sighed a heavy sigh and smiled a wan
smile at his mortal weariness. His face, clean-shaven, shrunken,
furrowed all over with deep vertical wrinkles, was of a corpselike
pallor, in contrast with his gleaming, ardent, almost youthful eyes.
Down over his cheeks, his temples, and the sides of his head, thick
shags of hair trickled like tongues of wet ashes.</p>
<p>Speaking in an obstrusive Neapolitan sing-song, the Marquis welcomed
us with great cordiality, asking his secretary to continue showing me
the mementos of which the room was full--all testimonials of his
fidelity to the Bourbon dynasty. Here was a small framed picture, as I
took it to be, curtained by a green cloth which bore, in letters of
gold, the legend: NON NASCONDO: RIPARO. ALZAMI E LEGGI (I conceal not,
but defend: lift me and read!). The Marquis asked Papiano to take down
the picture and bring it to him. It was not a picture at all, but a
letter (framed under glass) through which Pietro Ulloa, writing in
September, 1860 (among the last gasps of the Two Sicilies, that is)
invited the Marquis Giglio d'Auletta to assume a portfolio in the
Cabinet (which was destined never to take office). In the margins was
a transcript of the Marquis's acceptance, a ringing document, the
latter, branding with infamy those men of prominence in the realm who,
in the moment of supreme danger and anguish for their Sovereign, with
the filibusterer Garibaldi hammering at the gates of Naples, declined
to shoulder the responsibilities of Power.</p>
<p>As the old Marquis enunciated these documents aloud, he became so
wrought up that I could not help admiring him, though everything he
said offended my sensibilities as an Italian. He too, besides, had
been a hero after his fashion; as I learned from a story he told in
comment on a fleur-de-lis in gilded wood, that was also on show in the
parlor there.</p>
<p>It happened on the fifth of September, 1860. The King was leaving the
Royal Palace in an open carriage attended only by the Queen and a few
gentlemen of the court. On the _Via di Ghiaja_, the carriage was held
up by a jam in the traffic in front of a pharmacy which bore the sign
of the lilies-of-gold. A ladder running up to the side of the building
from the middle of the street was the cause of the congestion.
Carpenters were at work on top of the ladder, removing the lilies from
the front of the shop. The King called the Queen's attention to that
act of cowardice on the part of the druggist, who in more peaceful
times had been only too glad to vaunt his royal brevet as an honor to
his store. Well, he, the Marquis d'Auletta, happened to be passing at
the moment; and in a rage of indignant loyalty, he ran into the shop,
collared the offending pharmacist, pointed to the King out in the
street, spat in the man's face, and went away, brandishing one of the
fallen lilies as a trophy: "_Viva il Re_!"</p>
<p>The Marquis was as proud of that old shop-sign as he was of this
Golden Fleece, his keys as a Gentleman of the King's Chamber, his
trappings as a Chevalier of Saint Gennaro, and all the other
decorations on display in the drawing-room under two full length
portraits of their Majesties Ferdinand and Francis Second.</p>
<p>As soon as I could, I broke away from Papiano and Paleari to execute
my base design: I approached Pepita Pantogada.</p>
<p>It did not take me long to see that the young lady was in a very bad
humor with a case of nerves. She first wanted to know what time it
was:</p>
<p>"_Quattro e meccio_? Four firty? Vary well! Vary well!"</p>
<p>That she was not overjoyed to find it was "four firty" I gathered from
the tone of the "vary well's," and from the voluble and--in the
circumstances--bad-mannered tirade, on which she then launched out,
agaipst Italy in general and against Rome in particular--Rome so stuck
up over its blessed "glories of the Past?" The Colosseum? What was the
Colosseum? They had a Colosseum, _también_, in Spain, just as big and
just as old--"and we don't swell up and burst every time we walk by
it. Pile of dirty stone, _piedra muerta_, anyhow!" "If you want to
know what a theatre is, come to Spain and see one of our _Plazas de
Toros_. And your old paintings!  Why--I'd rather have this picture of
Minerva here, that Bernaldez is poking along trying to finish in time
for Kingdom Come!"</p>
<p>Yes, that was it! Pepita wanted that picture and she wanted it right
away. It was "four firty" and Bernaldez had not appeared! She fidgeted
around on her chair, rubbed her nose, opened and closed her hands,
with her eyes fastened on the drawing-room door.</p>
<p>At last the butler announced Bernaldez; and the painter came into the
room, panting and perspiring as though he had had the run of his life.
But Pepita's attitude at once changed. With a flounce she turned her
back on him and stared the other way, affecting an air of cool and
collected indifference. Bernaldez went over and shook hands with the
Marquis, bowed to us each in turn and then approached Pepita, speaking
in Spanish and begging pardon for his tardiness. Pepita now boiled
over, and when she spoke, it was in a torrent of Pantogadese:</p>
<p>"First of all, you speak Italian, since these people do not know
Spanish, and I think it bad manners for you to use Spanish with me. In
the second place, I Care not for you, for your picture, for you come
late, for your excuse, for nothing!"</p>
<p>Bernaldez did the best a fellow could do in such a case: he smiled
nervously, he bowed chivalrously; finally he asked if he might resume
work on the picture since there would be still an hour of light.</p>
<p>"As you say!" she answered in the same manner.  "You paint the picture
without me, or you rub it all out--it is one to me!"</p>
<p>Bernaldez bowed again, and turned to Signora Candida who was still
holding the dog Pepita had thrown into her arms.</p>
<p>Poor Minerva's hour of torture was beginning again; but her suffering
was as nothing compared to that of her executioner. To punish
Bernaldez for being late, Pepita began to flirt with me and with an
ardor that seemed to me excessive even for the purpose I had in view.
A glance in Adriana's direction warned me of the extent of that poor
girl's distress--it could not, for that matter have been much greater
than Minerva's, nor Manuel Bernaldez's, nor mine. I could feel my face
naming redder and redder, as though I were intoxicated with the anger
I knew I was arousing in that unfortunate young man. I had no pity for
him, but just a fiendish delight in his torment. My thoughts were all
for Adriana. She was being hurt to the quick: why should he not be
also? In fact, I seemed to feel that the more he suffered, the less
her pain might be.  Certain it was that the air in the room was
becoming electric with a tension that must soon reach the breaking
point.</p>
<p>It was Minerva who brought on the storm. Since Pepita was sitting with
her back to the easel and the sofa, the little dog was not being cowed
as usual by her mistress's sharp eyes; so the moment the painter
turned to his canvas, Minerva would cautiously rise from her "pose,"
and first one paw forward and then another, eventually get her nose
and head under the cushions, as though she were trying to hide. At any
rate, when Bernaldez would turn around again, he would find himself
confronted not by his pose, but by the hind legs and the curly
upturned tail of his unwilling subject.</p>
<p>Several times already Signora Candida had put Minerva in place again.
Bernaldez fuming with rage meantime, and commenting under his breath
on a word of endearment that he would catch every now and then from
Pepita's conversation with me. I say, under his breath.  His remarks
were not always inaudible, exactly; and more than once I was tempted
to inquire:</p>
<p>"Did you say something, Mr. Bernaldez?"</p>
<p>Finally his patience gave out and he exploded:</p>
<p>"Miss Pantogada, will you at least be kind enough to keep this little
bitch of yours where she belongs?"</p>
<p>"Vitch? Vitch? Vitch?" cried Pepita, jumping to her feet and turning
upon the poor painter, livid with rage; "you dare call my dog a
vitch?"</p>
<p>"But a dog doesn't mind coarse language!" I was unhappily prompted to
observe.</p>
<p>I didn't realize, at the moment, that a man in Bernaldez's state of
excitement might catch an allusion where none in the least was
intended. I was not criticizing his choice of words, nor did I even
think that he might take my "dog" as referring to himself. But he
broke out:</p>
<p>"My language is no business of yours, monsieur!"</p>
<p>Under his fixed aggressive provoking stare, I felt my temper begin to
rise. I could not help replying:</p>
<p>"I must say, Signor Bernaldez, you may be a great painter..."</p>
<p>"What's the matter?" piped the Marquis, noticing our hostile mood.</p>
<p>Bernaldez dropped his brush and his palette and strode over till his
face was a few inches from mine:</p>
<p>"... a great painter?... Say what you were going to say, monsieur!"</p>
<p>"... a great painter, yes... but your manners aren't all they might
be; and besides, you frighten the dog!"</p>
<p>There was a sting of contempt in the tone of every word I uttered.</p>
<p>"Yes," said he, "but we'll see whether it's only four-legged dogs that
are afraid of me!" And he drew back.</p>
<p>Pepita now began to shriek hysterically, and she. had technique enough
to fall fainting into the arms of Pa-piano and Signora Candida.</p>
<p>In the confusion I turned my attention, naturally, to the girl, whom
they were easing on a sofa. But I suddenly felt a clutch on my arm:
Bernaldez was upon me.  I was just in time to parry the blow he had
aimed at my face, and to throw him back with a hard push. Again he
rushed, barely missing my cheek with a furious stroke. It was my turn
to attack: but Papiano and Paleari had jumped between us. Bernaldez
was backing out of the room, shaking his fist at me:</p>
<p>"Consider yourself thrashed, monsieur. Consider yourself thrashed! I
am at your service at any time!  The people here know my address!"</p>
<p>The Marquis was standing in front of his chair, trembling and
shouting. I was struggling to get free from Paleari and Papiano to
pursue my assailant. The Marquis at last was able to make himself
heard:</p>
<p>"You are a gentleman," said he. "You must send two of your friends to
settle your accounts with this fellow. To me, he must explain how he
dared attack a guest of mine in my house!"</p>
<p>I was quivering with excitement, and barely had breath enough to wish
the Marquis good-day. I left at once, followed by Papiano and old
Anselmo. Adriana remained to assist in reviving Pepita, whom they had
carried to another room.</p>
<p>Now I had the privilege of getting down on my knees to the thief who
had robbed me and asking him, along with Paleari, to be my second. To
whom else could I appeal?</p>
<p>"Me?" asked Anselmo in honest stupor, "Me? Why, my dear Mr. Meis, you
must be joking? Me? Never in the world. Why, I know nothing about such
business.  ... All nonsense, anyhow! Really now, isn't it?"</p>
<p>"You must!" I retorted energetically, not choosing to begin an
argument at just that moment. "You and Mr. Papiano will be so good as
to go at once to that gentleman's house..."</p>
<p>"I? I? Not a single step, my dear boy! Ask me anything else--at your
service! But just this? No sir! Not my line, in the first place! And
anyhow--nonsense!  Nothing serious! Little rumpus like that!  Why so
excited?"</p>
<p>"No, you're wrong there!" interrupted Papiano, noticing my furious
rage. "It is a serious matter! Mr.  Meis has a right to demand
satisfaction. In fact, he's in honor bound to demand satisfaction.
He's got to fight! He's got to fight!..."</p>
<p>"So you, then!" I said. "You go, with a friend of yours..."</p>
<p>I had not expected a refusal from Papiano; but he opened his arms in a
gesture of apologetic helplessness.</p>
<p>"You know how I should like to help you out...  but..."</p>
<p>"You won't?" I stormed, stopping in the middle of the street.</p>
<p>"Wait! Let me explain, Mr. Meis!" he answered humbly. "Just see!...
Listen!... Notice the fix I'm in! Remember I'm bound hand and
foot--secretary, servant, slave... of the Marquis..."</p>
<p>"What's that got to do with it? The Marquis himself ... don't you
remember?"</p>
<p>"Yes, I know... but tomorrow? A Clerical! And the Party!... His
private secretary mixed up in a duel! The end of me, I can tell you!
And besides--that little wench, there... didn't you get the point?
Head over heels in love with Bernaldez!... Tomorrow, they kiss and
make up!... And then where do I stand, eh? The end of me! So sorry,
Mr. Meis... but try to understand my position... just as I say..."</p>
<p>"So you're both going to ditch me!" I answered, at my wits' end. "I
don't know another soul here in Rome..."</p>
<p>"But listen, there's a way, there's a way!" Papiano hastened to
advise. "I was going to suggest.... You see both my father-in-law
here, and I, would find it difficult ... impossible, in fact.... You
are right, no question of that! You're right! Every reason to see it
through! Can't overlook a matter like this....  Well, you just apply
to two officers in the army....  They can't refuse to represent a
gentleman in an affair of honor.... You go to them, explain how it all
happened.  ... They often do such favors for people not known in
town..."</p>
<p>We had reached the door of the house.</p>
<p>"So you won't! Very well!" I said to Papiano. And I turned on my heel
without another word, walking away aimlessly, my brain reeling from my
over-wrought emotion.</p>
<p>Again the thought of my crushing, my annihilating impotence had taken
possession of my whole consciousness.  Could a man in my circumstances
fight a duel?  Could I never get it through my head that I could no
longer do one single blessed thing? Two army officers!  Excellent!
But, just as a starter--two very proper questions: "Who was I?" "Where
did I come from?" No: the plain simple fact: people could spit on me,
slap my face, thrash me with a whip: and I could ask them to lay on a
little harder, please, but, for heaven's sake, to be quiet about it!
Two army officers! And let me give them just the least wee little
inkling of my real status--well, in the first place, they wouldn't
believe me, and who knows what they might suspect? In the second
place, I would be as badly off as with Adriana: if they did believe,
they would suggest I come to life again; since a dead man--what's the
use?--had no standing vis-a-vis of the code of honor!</p>
<p>So I could swallow--a good appetite to you!--the insult of Bernaldez
as I had swallowed the theft of Papiano; slink away with my dignity
wounded, my courage challenged--yes, with my face slapped--slink away
like a coward, out of sight, into the dark again, the dark of an
intolerable future where I would be an object of hateful loathing even
to myself. Future, indeed? Could there be any future? How could I go
on living? How endure the sight of myself? No, enough of this, enough
of this!</p>
<p>I stopped, everything whirling dizzily about me, my legs giving way at
the knees. A sinister impulse rose suddenly in my heart, giving me a
cold shiver of horror from head to foot.</p>
<p>"But before _that_," I said to myself, my brain rambling, "before
_that_, why not try? If I should succeed.  ... But try anyhow... just
to get back a little of my own self-respect! If I should succeed...
not quite such a craven coward in my own eyes... and what's there to
lose by trying? Why not try?"</p>
<p>I was a few blocks away from the _Caffe Aragno_.</p>
<p>"There! There! Catch as catch can! The first one I come to!"</p>
<p>In my blind agony, I went in.</p>
<p>In the outside room, around a table, sat five or six artillery
officers; and when one of them noticed me standing there, pale,
wild-eyed, hesitating, I bowed to him slightly, and with faltering
voice began:</p>
<p>"I'm sorry... excuse me... might I have a word with you?"</p>
<p>He was a beardless young chap, hardly graduated from the Academy, it
seemed to me. He rose, and came over toward me, answering me
courteously:</p>
<p>"What can I do for you, Signore?"</p>
<p>"Why, it's this way--may I introduce myself?  Adriano Meis! I am a
stranger in town. I have no friends here. I've had trouble... a point
of honor ... I need a couple of seconds... I don't know whom I could
ask.... If you and one of your friends..."</p>
<p>Surprised, perplexed, the man stood looking at me for a time; then
turning to his comrades, he called:</p>
<p>"Grigliotti!"</p>
<p>Grigliotti was a lieutenant of the upper numbers, with an upcurled
mustache, a monocle crammed willy nilly into an eyesocket, and smooth,
well-massaged cheeks. He got up from his seat, still talking to the
men at the table (I noticed he spoke with "r's" that were really
"w's") and stepped our way, making a slight somewhat constrained bow
to me. The moment I saw which man Grigliotti was, I felt like saying
to my cadet: "Not that man, please! Not that man!" But, as I
afterwards recognized, no one else in the group could have been so
well qualified for the task in hand as he. The articles of the code of
chivalry he knew from A to Z.</p>
<p>Such a line of talk as he gave me about my case, and all that I must
do! I was to telegraph, I forget exactly what--to a certain Colonel,
state my grievance, fix the main points clearly, and then go in person
to see him--ça va sans dire--see the Colonel, that is, precisely as
he, Grigliotti, had done once--he was not yet in the army at the
time--when something similar had happened to him--in Pavia, it was.
Because, in these matters of honor, you see, laws of chivalry... and
so on, and so on, till my head was a whirl of articles, precedents,
courts of honor, and "points well established in practice."</p>
<p>I had not liked the man from the moment I set eyes on him. Imagine how
I felt now when confronted with this dissertation on chivalry! Finally
I could endure the strain no longer, and I exclaimed impatiently:</p>
<p>"But, my dear sir, that's all very well. You're quite right, I dare
say; but how will a telegram help in my present situation? I am all
alone here in a strange city, and I want to fight a duel, understand,
right away, tomorrow if possible; and without so much nonsense.</p>
<p>"What difference does all this stuff make to me? I mentioned the
matter to you gentlemen in the hope--well, excuse me--in the hope that
I could get somewhere without all this--all this fussing,--there!..."</p>
<p>My outburst provoked an answer from Grigliotti in the same tone, and
we were soon engaged in what amounted to a brawl, both talking at the
same time and at the top of our lungs. But at a certain moment loud
guffaws of ridicule from the officers about me brought me up short. I
turned, and hurried away, my face aflame with indignant humiliation,
as though I had been whipped with a lash.</p>
<p>Where could I hide? The laughter of those soldiers seemed to pursue me
as I fled, my hands to my head, my brain in utter confusion. Should I
go home? No, I shuddered at the thought of that. I kept on walking,
walking, straight ahead, frantically. At last I noticed that I had
slackened my pace; and then finally I stopped, to catch my breath, to
rest a little; for I had no strength left to sustain the stinging
smart of that Tidicule which kept pulsing through me in waves of
frenzied vengefulness.</p>
<p>I say that I stopped. I did stop; and I stood some moments without
moving, my mind gradually becoming a blank. Then I began walking
again; but now I was strangely relieved, all feelings of bitterness
gone from my mind, a curious stupor replacing them.</p>
<p>Here was a shop window bright with its display of wares. I approached
and studied the objects with a meticulous absorbing interest.</p>
<p>The lights went out. The stores all along the street were closing.</p>
<p>Yes, they were closing for me, eternally! People were going home,
leaving me alone, a solitary wanderer on deserted streets, all doors
and windows closed, all lights extinguished--silence and solitude for
me, eternally!</p>
<p>I moved along.</p>
<p>As the city went to sleep, life itself seemed to recede from about me,
as though it were something remote, intangible, without meaning or
purpose.</p>
<p>Had the sinister intention matured spontaneously within me? I do not
know; but at last, involuntarily, guided as it were by that inner
determination, I found myself on the Margherita Bridge, leaning over
the parapet and gazing terror-stricken down into the black swirling
stream.</p>
<p>"Down there, in that water?"</p>
<p>I shuddered....</p>
<p>But it was not with fear! It was a violent outburst of anger, an
uprising of all my instincts of life in ferocious hatred against those
who were now bringing me here to the end they had assigned me back in
the Flume of "The Coops" at Miragno. Yes, those women: Romilda and the
widow Pescatore! They had brought me to this pass. I would never have
thought of feigning suicide to get rid of them! And yet now, after two
years of living like a ghost in the illusion of a life beyond the
death they had wished upon me, here I was--dragged by the collar to
executing their sentence upon myself! They were right after all! I had
really died like the corpse they found! They were free of me--though I
was not free of them!</p>
<p>And I rebelled. Could I not get even with them somehow, instead of
killing myself?</p>
<p>Suicide? How could a dead man--hah, hah!--a dead man commit suicide? A
nobody commit suicide?</p>
<p>I straightened up, as suddenly everything seemed strangely lucid and
clear to me. Get even with them!  But what did that mean? It meant
going back to Miragno, didn't it? It meant shaking off the lie that
had throttled me! It meant coming to life again to spite them, to
chastise them, with my real name, my real personality, my very very
real misfortunes? Ah yes ... but my present fix! Could I cut loose
from the present that easily? Could I throw aside my life in the _Via
Ripetta_ as one did a bundle of rubbish for which there is no further
use? No, no! That I could not do! I knew I could not do so! So I stood
there, in anguished bewilderment, uncertain as to a decision.</p>
<p>By chance I put my hand into my pocket and my nervous fingers came in
contact with something which I did not at once recognize. With an
angry twitch I pulled it out. It was the cap that I had always worn on
my trains and about the house, the cap in which, to old Anselmo's
delight, I had started out to make my call on the Marquis and which I
had thrust into my pocket distractedly.</p>
<p>I was about to toss the thing into the water when, in a flash, an idea
came to me. Something I had thought of long before on my trip from
Alenga to Turin rose clearly to my consciousness.</p>
<p>"Here," I muttered almost involuntarily to myself, "here on the
railing of this bridge... my hat... my cane.... Yes... just as they
did on the bank of the mill-flume at Miragno.... There, Mattia
Pascal...  here, I--Adriano Meis.... Tit for tat!... I come to life
again... to their undoing!..."</p>
<p>The joy that seized on me amounted to an exultant inspiring frenzy. Of
course, of course! To kill myself--the self which they had killed,
would be absurd, absurd! I must kill rather the ridiculous fiction
which had tortured and tormented me for two long years! I must put an
end to that wretch of an Adriano Meis, who, to live at all, had to be
a coward, a liar, a worthless miserable outcast! Adriano Meis! A false
name for a mannikin, with a brain of sawdust, a heart of rags, and
veins perhaps of rubber, with colored water for a weak diluted blood!
Away with such an odious fiction--drown him as they had drowned Mattia
Pascal!</p>
<p>Exactly: tit for tat! First their turn, and now mine!  Adriano Meis, a
ghastly life springing from a ghastly lie! Finish him then, with
another falsehood just as gruesome!</p>
<p>And that was a way out of everything! What better reparation could I
make to Adriana for the wrong I had done her? But... could I swallow
the insult from that boor of a Spaniard? The coward--assailing me
there by surprise, under conditions where a fight was impossible!
Could I swallow it? I, the I that was really I, had not a trace of
fear for the man.  Of that I was sure. He had not insulted me. He had
insulted Adriano Meis. Well, Adriano Meis could swallow anything. Of
course he could: was he not killing himself?</p>
<p>Yes, that was the way, the only way, out. I was trembling from head to
foot, as though I were really about to kill someone; but my brain was
clear as crystal, my heart light with a sudden buoyancy that was
almost gay.</p>
<p>I looked about me. Over in that direction, on the _Lungotevere_,
someone must have noticed me standing on the bridge at that hour, a
policeman perhaps, on lookout for just such tragedies. I had to make
sure; so I walked along, first into the _Piazza della Liberta_, then
along the river boulevard--the _Lungotevere dei Mellini_.</p>
<p>No one!</p>
<p>I retraced my steps; but before going out on the bridge again, I
stopped under a street lamp in the shadow of some trees.</p>
<p>My notebook!</p>
<p>I tore out a page and wrote on it in pencil; "Adriano Meis." Anything
else? Well, my address, perhaps; yes, and the date! That would do!
That would tell the whole story! Adriano Meis--his hat and his cane!</p>
<p>As for the rest--well, a few clothes, and a few books!  I could leave
them back at the house! Nothing much!  The money left from the robbery
I had with me.</p>
<p>I stole along the bridge, bending low behind the railing.  My legs
were shaking under me and my heart was all athrob. I selected the
darkest spot over the river, took off my hat, slipped the note behind
the ribbon, and set the hat with my cane on the broad stone top of the
parapet. On my head I crammed the cap I so luckily had with me--the
cap that had suggested to me the means of my escape; and keeping to
the shadows, I moved stealthily away, sneaking along like a thief in
the dark, not daring to turn my head.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
